---
# @formatter:off
title: History
order: 4
# @formatter:on
---
## History of the Trip

The New Jersey Synod began its ministry to Bosnia in 1999 when the Synod’s Commission on Youth Ministry (predecessor
body to the Youth Ministry Mission Team) heard newly arrived Youth Ministry Specialist Jason Reed speak of his
experience leading servant trips to Croatia and Bosnia. The commission asked; “Can we do that?” The results of that
question lie before you.

In 2000 the Synod held it first International Servant Trip (IST) to Croatia and Bosnia. We sent 11 people from five
congregations in New Jersey (and two from the Metro Washington, D.C., Synod, and one Roman Catholic from Ramsey, N.J.).
This first Travel Team held five Friendship Camps in Bosnia and several Bible Camps in Lutheran Congregations in
Croatia. Friendship Camps are day-long camps held in orphanages and schools for children ages 10-13 (though we get
younger and older children as well). At the camps, we lead cooperative games, do diversity training, provide art and
music therapy, and offer as much fun and love as possible.

In 2001, we returned to Bosnia and Croatia with a Travel Team of 27. In 2002 the New Jersey Synod became a Companion
Synod to the Lutheran Church in Croatia and split the trip -- one team and trip to Bosnia and one to Croatia.

As a result of our continued positive presence in Bosnia, schools for Friendship Camps in new towns continued to open up
for us. In 2004 we were invited into six new communities, four of which were in Republik Srpska, the Serb portion of
Bosnia. This was a critical shift, allowing us access to children in communities that have few resources and little
interaction with the USA and the West.

To respond to this increased ministry opportunity, in 2005 we began sending a North and South Team to Bosnia, allowing
us to offer 16 Friendship Camps each year. As the years go by, we continued to be invited into communities that
experienced some of the worst the war had to offer: Srebrenica, where the largest massacre of the war took place;
Kozarac, home to the infamous Trnopolje Death Camp; and so on.

Since its first Bosnia IST in 2000, there have been more than 200 Travel Team members, young and old, from congregations
all around the New Jersey Synod (along with people from seven other ELCA Synods and several other faith communities)
sent to Bosnia to bring healing, hope and peace to the children, communities and country of Bosnia. Multiple Travel Team
members have served more than one year!

As of 2019, we have served about 30,000 children (no telling how many of those children have attended camp more than
once)! We continue to be the only ELCA presence and, for all intents and purposes, the only Lutheran presence in this
country.
